(Evolutionary) Macroecology
We are interested in all things "macroecological". Macroecology is a synthetic research program that seeks to understand the emergent, statistical properties of complex ecological systems (e.g. ecological communities, complete biotas, biodiversity patterns) at broad spatial and temporal scales. We are particularly interested in macroecological research owing to its integration of ecology, biogeography and macroevolution, considering processes at different scales, in order to explain geographic biodiversity patterns. Under this research program, we have described and evaluated species richness gradients considering the inherent relationship between diversity and distribution (Villalobos & Arita 2010; Villalobos et al. 2014) as well as the intricate relationship between ecological and evolutionary drivers of such gradients (García-Andrade et al. 2023). 

We investigate "traditional" macroecological patterns such as those looking at richness differences among regions and relating them to the environment and history of such regions (e.g. Arango et al. 2021, Gouveia et al. 2014; Velasco et al. 2018) as well as the drivers that determine geographic range size variations (Carvajal-Quintero et al. 2019, López-Reyes et al. 2024, Olalla-Tárraga et al. 2019). Most macroecological research requires large amounts of data and particular tools to handle and analyze such data. In order to help in this endeavor, we continuously work in collaboration with other colleagues to develop and contribute useful tools for conducting macroecological research (e.g. letsR package in R; Vilela & Villalobos 2015).

Currently, we include phylogenetic/macroevolutionary approaches to understand geographic gradients of biodiversity and related macroecological patterns (Villalobos et al. 2020; Rubalcaba et al. 2023; Herrera-Pérez et al., 2026). More specifically, we test evolutionary hypotheses (Alves et al. 2017) and processes driving biodiversity patterns (García-Andrade et al. 2023, García-Rodriguez et al. 2025, Pinto-Ledezma et al. 2019) as well as trait evolution such as Grinnellian niches (Peixoto et al. 2017, Esparza-Estrada et al. 2022), their physiological limits (Bennett et al. 2021, Moore et al. 2023), or other ecological traits such as diets (Ochoa-Sanz et al. 2025). You can find a (non-systematic) review of macroecological approaches to study evolutionary diversification under a geographic perspective in Villalobos et al. 2020 (In: Rull V., Carnaval A. (eds) Neotropical Diversification: Patterns and Processes. Springer) and our approach to study the evolution and responses to climate change in Villalobos et al. 2026 (in the Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Biology, Elsevier).


Macroevolution
Along with the description and evaluation of geographical biodiversity patterns, our research focuses on investigating the actual processes that change species numbers within and across the planet: evolutionary processes related to speciation, extinction and biogeographic dispersal (Alves et al. 2017, Pinto-Ledezma et al. 2019, Arango et al. 2025, López-Reyes et al. 2025). In the same vein, we are interested in the (macro)evolution of species traits as related to their macroecological patterns such as body size gradients (Velasco et al. 2020; Rubalcaba et al. 2022), habitat (Rodrigues et al. 2019; Esparza-Estrada et al. 2022) or diet preferences (Ochoa-Sanz et al. 2025) and the evolutionary convergence of eco-morphs (Verde-Arregoitia et al. 2025). Evaluating such macroevolutionary processes at broad spatial scales has become commonplace in macroecology and several techniques are now being applied to the study of evolutionary diversification under a geographic perspective (see a review on this topic in Villalobos et al. 2020 (Rull V., Carnaval A. (eds) Neotropical Diversification: Patterns and Processes. Springer).

Given the nature of both macroecological and macroevolutionary patterns driven by species traits and their evolutionary history, we rely heavily on Phylogenetic Comparative Methods (PCMs). For this same reason, we carefully consider PCMs and other evolutionary/biogeographical methods, while also being interested in applying, testing (Alves et al. 2017, Jardim et al. 2021) and developing such methods (Diniz-Filho et al. 2015, Duarte et al. 2025) to understand the tempo and mode of macroevolutionary and macroecological patterns. 


Macroecology of Interactions
Several biotic and abiotic factors change across time and space, which may directly affect not only the distribution and abundance of species but also other dimensions of biodiversity such as ecological functions and biotic interactions. Over such spatial and temporal gradients, interactions among species form complex ecological networks with emergent properties that cannot be observed at the species or community level. Applying a macroecological approach to biotic interactions, therefore, involves exploring emergent patterns derived from emergent properties.

The properties of species interaction networks can be associated with geographical as well as climatic gradients and be shaped by different ecological and evolutionary processes such as dispersal capacity and evolutionary history of the interacting species. In this Project, we combined macroecological and ecological network approaches to study biotic interactions at broad spatial scales (Corro et al. 2020, 2021). More specifically, we are interested in species-level (Dáttilo et al. 2020; Moulatlet et al. 2023, 2025, Villa et al. 2025) as well as assemblage/network level properties and their spatial/environmental correlates (Luna et al. 2022). In this vein, we are interested in the formal integration between biotic interactions and macroecology as a means for testing ecological and evolutionary theories across spatial and temporal scales (forthcoming book edited by Wesley Dáttilo and Fabricio Villalobos, Elsevier)


Conservation Biogeography
One of the aims of biodiversity science is to produce studies/knowledge that can help mitigate the current biodiversity crisis and contribute to the conservation of biological diversity. Owing to the intrinsic relationship between the two basic properties of biodiversity, diversity and distribution, and their obvious relevance to conservation, our research also has an applied component. In general, we try to implement macroecological analyses in the context of conservation planning, namely, the designation of priority sites for conservation or even research. Relevant sites for conservation are usually defined in an "either or" fashion based on richness, endemicity or threat. However, these definitions usually result in different sets of sites that are spatially non-congruent. This is why we favor a more comprehensive view of conservation where we consider both diversity and distribution simultaneously to define priority sites for conservation (Villalobos et al. 2013, Cú-Vizcarra et al. 2022). Moreover, we considered that such endeavor can be further applied to provide more information on research needs and knowledge gaps (Nori et al. 2020, 2023; Velazco et al. 2019, 2023).
Another relevant topic in conservation biology is the identification and understanding of biological invasions. Using our evolutionary and macroecological approach, we have also contributed studies seeking to understand biological invasion patterns and their underlying mechanisms, from the perspective of native and exotic species (Kusumoto et al. 2019, Pinto-Ledezma et al. 2020, Falcão & Villalobos 2026) and the assemblages they form (Kusumoto et al. 2021). 
In the same vein, we are interested in macroecological approaches to study the effect of habitat loss and fragmentation on species’ extinction risk. Leveraging information on population abundances and local surveys as well as satellite images, we try to evaluate the effect of such fragmentation on species conservation status (Galán-Acedo et al. 2021,2023; Saldívar-Burrola et al. 2022) as well as the potential drivers behind species extinction risk (Galán-Acedo et al. 2024, Verde-Arregoitia et al. 2026)

